Add Server Instructions blog post and update clients table (#1482)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: blog/content/posts/2025-09-22-using-server-instructions.md

+++
date = '2025-09-22T00:00:00+00:00'
publishDate = '2025-09-22T00:00:00+00:00'
draft = false
title = 'Server Instructions: Giving LLMs a user manual for your server'
author = 'Ola Hungerford (Maintainer)'
tags = ['automation', 'mcp', 'server instructions', 'tools']
+++

Many of us are still exploring the nooks and crannies of MCP and learning how to best use the building blocks of the protocol to enhance our agents and applications. Some features, like [Prompts](https://blog.modelcontextprotocol.io/posts/2025-07-29-prompts-for-automation/), are more frequently implemented and used. Others may appear a bit more obscure but have a lot of influence on how well an agent will understand your server. Server instructions are one of the latter.

## The Problem

> Imagine you're a Large Language Model (LLM) who just got handed a collection of tools from servers A, B, and C to complete a task. They might have already been carefully pre-selected or they might be more like what my physical workbench looks like in my garage - a mishmash of recently-used tools.

Author: I made this change (forgot to just use apply from batch).

> Now let's say that the developer of Server A has pre-existing knowledge or preferences about how best to use their tools or prompts, as well as more background information about the underlying systems that power them.

Author: I made this change (forgot to just use apply from batch).

Some examples could include:

- 'Tool C should always be used after tool A and B'
- 'This prompt or tool works best if specialized tools from other servers X and Y are available'
- 'Server A tools are rate limited to 10 requests per minute'
- 'Always look up the user's language and accessibility preferences before attempting to fetch any resources with this server.'
- 'Only use tool A to ask the user for their preferences if elicitation is supported. Otherwise, fall back to using default user preferences.'

> 

Author: I added:

`So now our question becomes: what's the most effective way to share this contextual knowledge?`

Alternatively, relying on just prompts to give common instructions like this means that:

- The prompt always needs to be selected by the user, and
- The instructions are more likely to get lost in the shuffle of other messages.

Imagine a pile of post-it notes, all filled with instructions on how to do things with a drawer full of tools. It's totally possible that you have the right notes lined up in front of you to do everything reliably, but it's not always the most efficient way to provide this type of context.

For global instructions that you want the LLM to always follow - instead of including them in multiple tool descriptions or prompts, it can make more sense to include them in the model's system prompt instead.

This is where **server instructions** come in. Server instructions give the server a way to inject information that the LLM should always read in order to understand how to use the server - independent of individual prompts, tools, or messages.

> **Note:** because the exact way that the MCP host uses server instructions is up to the implementer, it's not always guaranteed that they will be injected into the system prompt. It's always recommended to evaluate a client's behavior with your server and its tools before relying on this functionality.

Reviewer: I think it might be worth mentioning that because the instructions may be injected into the system prompt, they should be written with caution and diligence. No instructions are better than poorly written instructions.

Author: I updated this section to be:

> **Note:** Because server instructions may be injected into the system prompt, they should be written with caution and diligence. No instructions are better than poorly written instructions. Additionally, the exact way that the MCP host uses server instructions is up to the implementer, so it's not always guaranteed that they will be injected into the system prompt. It's always recommended to evaluate a client's behavior with your server and its tools before relying on this functionality.

These results suggest that while some models naturally gravitate toward optimal patterns, others benefit significantly from explicit guidance. This variability makes server instructions particularly valuable for ensuring consistent behavior across different models and client implementations.

## Implementing Server Instructions: General Tips For Server Developers

One key to good instructions is focusing on **what tools and resources don't convey**:

1. **Capture cross-feature relationships**:

   ```json
   {
     "instructions": "Always call 'authenticate' before any 'fetch_*' tools. The 'cache_clear' tool invalidates all 'fetch_*' results."
   }
   ```

2. **Document operational patterns**:

   ```json
   {
     "instructions": "For best performance: 1) Use 'batch_fetch' for multiple items, 2) Check 'rate_limit_status' before bulk operations, 3) Results are cached for 5 minutes."
   }
   ```

3. **Specify constraints and limitations**:

   ```json
   {
     "instructions": "File operations limited to workspace directory. Binary files over 10MB will be rejected. Rate limit: 100 requests/minute across all tools."
   }
   ```

> ### Anti-Patterns to Avoid

Author: I added:

> 4. **Write model-agnostic instructions**:
> 
>    Keep instructions factual and functional rather than assuming specific model behaviors. Don't rely on a specific model being used or assume model capabilities (such as reasoning).

> ❌ **Don't repeat tool descriptions**:

Author: Good idea, I removed them.

"instructions": "This server provides comprehensive functionality for... [500 words]"

// Good - concise and actionable
"instructions": "GitHub integration server. Workflow: 1) 'auth_github', 2) 'list_repos', 3) 'clone_repo'. API rate limits apply - check 'rate_status' before bulk operations."
```

### What Server Instructions Can't Do:

- **Guarantee certain behavior:** As with any text you give to an LLM, your instructions aren't going to be followed the same way all the time. Anything you ask a model to do is like rolling dice. The reliability of any instructions will vary based on randomness, sampling parameters, model, client implementation, other servers and tools at play, and many other variables.
  - Don't rely on instructions for any critical actions that need to happen in conjunction with other actions, especially in security or privacy domains. These are better implemented as deterministic rules or hooks.
- **Account for suboptimal tool design:** Tool descriptions and other aspects of interface design for agents are still going to make or break how well LLMs can use your server when they need to take an action.

## Currently Supported Host Applications

> For a complete list of host applications that support server instructions, you can refer to the [Clients](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/clients) page in the MCP documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a complete list of host applications that support server instructions, refer to the [Clients](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/clients) page in the MCP documentation.
```

For a basic demo of server instructions in action, you can use the [Everything reference server](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/servers/tree/main/src/everything) to confirm that your client supports this feature:

1. Install the Everything Server in your host. The link above includes instructions on how to do this in a few popular applications. In the example below, we're using [Claude Code](https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code/mcp).
2. Once you've confirmed that the server is connected, ask the model: `does the everything server tools have any special 
instructions?`
3. If the model can see your instructions, you should get a response like the one below:

<img
    src="/posts/images/claude_code_instructions.JPG"
    alt="Screenshot of response which reads: Server instructions are working!"
  />

## Wrapping Up

> Server instructions represent a small but powerful lever in the MCP toolkit. By investing time in creating clear and actionable instructions, you can significantly improve how LLMs interact with your server. This post skimmed the surface of how server instructions can be used and implemented in MCP servers. Be sure to share your own examples, thoughts, and questions on [Discord](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/community/communication).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clear and actionable server instructions are a key tool in your MCP toolkit, offering a simple but effective way to enhance how LLMs interact with your server. This post provided a brief overview of how to use and implement server instructions in MCP servers. We encourage you to share your examples, insights, and questions on [in our discussions](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/discussions).
```

+++
date = '2025-09-22T00:00:00+00:00'
publishDate = '2025-09-22T00:00:00+00:00'
draft = false
title = 'Server Instructions: Giving LLMs a user manual for your server'
author = 'Ola Hungerford (Maintainer)'
tags = ['automation', 'mcp', 'server instructions', 'tools']
+++

Many of us are still exploring the nooks and crannies of MCP and learning how to best use the building blocks of the protocol to enhance agents and applications. Some features, like [Prompts](https://blog.modelcontextprotocol.io/posts/2025-07-29-prompts-for-automation/), are frequently implemented and used within the MCP ecosystem. Others may appear a bit more obscure but have a lot of influence on how well an agent can interact with an MCP server. **Server instructions** fall in the latter category.

## The Problem

Imagine you're a Large Language Model (LLM) who just got handed a collection of tools from servers A, B, and C to complete a task. They might have already been carefully pre-selected or they might be more like what my workbench looks like in my garage - a mishmash of recently-used tools.

> Now let's say that the developer of MCP Server A has pre-existing knowledge or preferences about how to best use their tools or prompts, as well as more background information about the underlying systems that power them.

Author: @dsp-ant makes sense, I changed it to this, what do you think?

> Imagine you're a Large Language Model (LLM) who just got handed a collection of tools from a database server, a file system server, and a notification server to complete a task. They might have already been carefully pre-selected or they might be more like what my workbench looks like in my garage - a mishmash of recently-used tools.
> 
> Now let's say that the developer of the database server has pre-existing knowledge or preferences about how to best use their tools, as well as more background information about the underlying systems that power them.
> 
> Some examples could include:
> 
> - "Always use `validate_schema` → `create_backup` → `migrate_schema` for safe database migrations"
> - "When using the `export_data` tool, the file system server's `write_file` tool is required for storing local copies"
> - "Database connection tools are rate limited to 10 requests per minute"
> - "If `create_backup` fails, check if the notification server is connected before attempting to send alerts"
> - "Only use `request_preferences` to ask the user for settings if elicitation is supported. Otherwise, fall back to using default configuration"

Alternatively, relying on prompts to give common instructions means that:

- The prompt always needs to be selected by the user, and
- The instructions are more likely to get lost in the shuffle of other messages.

Imagine a pile of post-it notes, all filled with instructions on how to do things with a drawer full of tools. It's totally possible that you have the right notes lined up in front of you to do everything reliably, but it's not always the most efficient way to provide this type of context.

For global instructions that you want the LLM to always follow, it's worth injecting them in the model's system prompt instead of including them in multiple tool descriptions or standalone prompts.

This is where **server instructions** come in. Server instructions give the server a way to inject information that the LLM should always read in order to understand how to use the server - independent of individual prompts, tools, or messages.

> **Note:** Because server instructions may be injected into the system prompt, they should be written with caution and diligence. No instructions are better than poorly written instructions. Additionally, the exact way that the MCP host uses server instructions is up to the implementer, so it's not always guaranteed that they will be injected into the system prompt. It's always recommended to evaluate a client's behavior with your server and its tools before relying on this functionality.

Author: @dsp-ant Agree it makes sense to break out this aside more.  However, its not just for security, and its more about implementation variability.  Plus we get deeper into these aspects in the other sections of the post, so this is just an early callout.  I updated this section to read like this:

> ### A Note on Implementation Variability
> 
> Because server instructions may be injected into the system prompt, they should be written with caution and diligence. No instructions are better than poorly written instructions. 
> 
> Additionally, the exact way that the MCP host uses server instructions is up to the implementer, so it's not always guaranteed that they will be injected into the system prompt. It's always recommended to evaluate a client's behavior with your server and its tools before relying on this functionality.
> 
> We will get deeper into both of these considerations with concrete examples.

```json
// Bad - too long and detailed
"instructions": "This server provides comprehensive functionality for... [500 words]"

// Good - concise and actionable
"instructions": "GitHub integration server. Workflow: 1) 'auth_github', 2) 'list_repos', 3) 'clone_repo'. API rate limits apply - check 'rate_status' before bulk operations."
```

### What Server Instructions Can't Do:

- **Guarantee certain behavior:** As with any text you give an LLM, your instructions aren't going to be followed the same way all the time. Anything you ask a model to do is like rolling dice. The reliability of any instructions will vary based on randomness, sampling parameters, model, client implementation, other servers and tools at play, and many other variables.
  - Don't rely on instructions for any critical actions that need to happen in conjunction with other actions, especially in security or privacy domains. These are better implemented as deterministic rules or hooks.
- **Account for suboptimal tool design:** Tool descriptions and other aspects of interface design for agents are still going to make or break how well LLMs can use your server when they need to take an action.

> - **Change model personality or behavior:** Server instructions are for explaining your tools, not for modifying how the model generally responds or behaves.

Author: @PederHP I added this point to this section for "What Server Instructions Can't Do:"

> - **Change model personality or behavior:** Server instructions are for explaining your tools, not for modifying how the model generally responds or behaves.

> ### A Note for Client Implementers

Author: @PederHP I added a brief section for client implementers here.

cc @connor4312 @evalstate since I previously left this out and focused on the server only, if you have any feedback here.
